.\" WSLMole man page
.TH WSLMOLE 1 "June 2026" "WSLMole 2.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
wslmole \- WSL system optimization, cleanup, and diagnostics tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wslmole
[\fIglobal-options\fR] [\fIcommand\fR] [\fIcommand-options\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wslmole
is a terminal-based system optimization tool built for WSL2 (Windows Subsystem
for Linux) environments. It scans, cleans, and tunes your WSL instance through
direct CLI commands or an inline interactive menu.
.PP
All commands that delete data run in
.B dry-run
mode by default: they only preview what would change. Pass the global
.B \-\-yes
flag (or answer the interactive confirmation prompt) to actually apply changes.
.PP
Running
.B wslmole
with no command and no action flag runs a quick health scan.
.SH INSTALLATION
Run
.B ./install.sh
from a git checkout. The installer is idempotent (safe to re-run) and:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
symlinks
.I wslmole
into
.IR /usr/local/bin ;
.IP \(bu 2
installs this man page into
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1
and refreshes the man-page database;
.IP \(bu 2
installs bash and zsh completions system-wide, falling back to the per-user
XDG data directory when system locations are not writable;
.IP \(bu 2
verifies required dependencies (Bash 4+, coreutils/findutils) and reports
optional ones
.RB ( git
for self-update,
.B mandoc
for the man page) as non-fatal warnings.
.RE
.PP
Self-update via
.B wslmole update
only works from a git checkout; the installer detects this and reports whether
self-update is available.
.PP
To uninstall, run
.BR ./uninstall.sh ,
which removes the symlink, man page, and completions. Add
.B \-\-purge
to also remove
.I ~/.config/wslmole
and
.IR ~/.local/share/wslmole .
.SH OPTION PARSING
Global options are only recognized
.B before
the first non-flag argument (the command). Once a command is identified, every
remaining argument is forwarded verbatim to that command. As a result, global
flags such as
.B \-\-yes
and
.B \-\-format
must be placed
.B before
the command name.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the full usage screen and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version (\fBWSLMole v2.0.0\fR) and exit.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Launch the inline interactive menu and exit.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quick
Run the quick system health scan and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose session logging to
.IR ~/.local/share/wslmole/wslmole.log .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable colored output. Color is also auto-disabled when
.B NO_COLOR
or
.B WSLMOLE_NO_COLOR
is set or output is not a terminal.
.TP
.BI \-\-format " FORMAT"
Set the output format. Valid values are
.B text
(default) and
.BR json .
An invalid value is an error. The
.BI \-\-format= FORMAT
syntax is also accepted.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Execute changes (sets
.B DRY_RUN=false
and
.BR FORCE=true )
and skip all confirmation prompts. This is the real "force" switch for
.B clean
and
.BR dev ;
it must be placed before the command.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B clean \fR[\fIcategory...\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
System cleanup across seven categories: APT cache, snap revisions, rotated
logs, temp files, browser cache, user data, and WSL-specific cleanup.
.TP
.B disk \fR[\fIpath\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
Disk usage analysis with six view modes.
.TP
.B dev \fR[\fIpath\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
Developer artifact cleanup (build directories, dependency directories, caches).
.TP
.B diagnose \fR[\fItype\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
System diagnostics for processes, memory, services, and WSL resources.
.TP
.B packages \fR[\fIaction\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
Package manager wrapper for APT and Snap.
.TP
.B wsl \fR[\fIaction\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
WSL-specific tools and information. Requires a WSL environment.
.TP
.B scan
Quick system health scan with score and recommendations. Same as running
.B wslmole
with no command.
.TP
.B plan \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Show a risk-labeled action plan without changing the system (read-only).
.TP
.B fix \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Preview and apply low-risk automatic cleanup actions from the action plan.
.TP
.B update \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Check for and install updates from the Git repository (self-update).
.TP
.B help \fR[\fIcommand\fR]
Show general usage, or help for a specific command.
.SH CLEAN
.B wslmole clean
[\fIcategory...\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
Cleanup runs in dry-run mode by default; pass the global
.B \-\-yes
flag to delete. Categories may be given positionally (for example
.BR "wslmole clean apt logs" )
or via
.BR \-c / \-\-category .
.SS Categories
.TP
.B apt
Run
.B apt-get clean
and
.BR "apt-get autoclean" .
Requires root, otherwise skipped.
.TP
.B snap
Remove disabled snap revisions.
.TP
.B logs
Delete rotated logs in
.I /var/log
(\fB*.gz\fR, \fB*.old\fR, \fB*.1\fR, \fB*.2\fR, \fB*.3\fR) and vacuum the journal
to 7 days (root).
.TP
.BR tmp " (alias: " temp )
Delete files older than 7 days in
.I /tmp
and
.IR /var/tmp ,
plus optional cleanup of
.I ~/.cache
files older than 7 days.
.TP
.B browser
Clear cache directories for Google Chrome, Chromium, Mozilla Firefox, and
Microsoft Edge under
.IR ~/.cache .
.TP
.BR user " (alias: " userdata )
Clear the thumbnail cache
.RI ( ~/.cache/thumbnails ),
trash
.RI ( ~/.local/share/Trash ),
and
.IR recently-used.xbel .
.TP
.B wsl
Delete
.I /var/log/wsl*.log
and print
.I /mnt/c
performance tips. No-op outside WSL.
.TP
.B all
Expand to all seven categories.
.PP
When no category is given the default set is
.BR apt ", " snap ", " logs ", " tmp ", and " wsl
(browser and user data are opt-in). An unknown category prints a correction
suggestion.
.SS Options
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Preview only; perform no deletion (sets
.BR DRY_RUN=true ).
This is the default.
.TP
.BI \-c " LIST" "\fR, \fB" \-\-category " LIST"
Comma-separated list of categories to clean.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show clean help.
.PP
.B Note:
the clean help text advertises a
.BR \-f / \-\-force
flag, but the command's own parser does
.B not
implement it; passing
.B \-f
after
.B clean
yields "Unknown option". Forcing is done with the global
.B \-\-yes
flag placed before the command.
.SH DISK
.B wslmole disk
[\fIpath\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
The path defaults to
.I /
and must be an existing directory. JSON output is emitted for the
.BR summary ", " files ", and " old
modes.
.SS Modes
.TP
.B summary
.B df
overview plus top-level directory sizes (default).
.TP
.B tree
Hierarchical
.B "du --max-depth"
tree sorted by size.
.TP
.BR files " (aliases: " file ", " large ", " largest )
Largest individual files.
.TP
.BR folders " (aliases: " folder ", " dirs )
Largest immediate subdirectories.
.TP
.BR types " (alias: " type )
Usage grouped by file extension.
.TP
.B old
Files not modified in 90 or more days.
.PP
The mode may also be given positionally (for example
.BR "wslmole disk / files" );
.B usage
is an alias for
.BR summary .
.SS Options
.TP
.BI \-m " MODE" "\fR, \fB" \-\-mode " MODE"
Analysis mode (default:
.BR summary ).
.TP
.BI \-d " N" "\fR, \fB" \-\-depth " N"
Tree depth for
.B tree
mode (default: 3).
.TP
.BI \-n " N" "\fR, \fB" \-\-top " N"
Number of results to show (default: 10).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show disk help.
.SH DEV
.B wslmole dev
[\fIpath\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
Developer artifact cleanup. The path defaults to
.I .
and must be an existing directory. Cleanup runs in dry-run mode by default;
use the global
.B \-\-yes
flag to delete. Artifact types may be given positionally
.RB ( node
is an alias for
.BR node_modules ).
.SS Artifact types
.B node_modules ", " target ", " __pycache__ ", " .gradle ", " venv ", " .venv ", "
.B build ", " dist ", " .next ", " .nuxt ", " .cache ", " vendor ", " .tox ", "
.B .pytest_cache ", " coverage ", " .nyc_output .
.PP
.B all
expands to the full list, which is also the default when no type is given.
.SS Options
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Preview only; perform no deletion (sets
.BR DRY_RUN=true ).
This is the default.
.TP
.BI \-t " LIST" "\fR, \fB" \-\-types " LIST"
Comma-separated list of artifact types to target.
.TP
.BI \-\-older\-than " DAYS"
Only target artifacts whose modification time is older than
.I DAYS
days.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show dev help.
.PP
.B Note:
as with
.BR clean ,
the dev help text advertises
.BR \-f / \-\-force ,
but the command does not implement it. Use the global
.B \-\-yes
flag instead.
.SH DIAGNOSE
.B wslmole diagnose
[\fItype\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
The type is given positionally and defaults to
.BR all .
JSON output is available for the
.B memory
diagnostic.
.SS Types
.TP
.B all
Run process, memory, and service diagnostics, plus
.B wsl
when in WSL (default).
.TP
.BR process " (alias: " processes )
Top 10 CPU and top 10 memory consumers.
.TP
.BR memory " (alias: " mem )
.I /proc/meminfo
breakdown with a colored progress bar and swap status.
.TP
.BR service " (alias: " services )
Failed systemd services, running count, and the top 5 services by memory.
No-op when systemd is unavailable.
.TP
.B wsl
WSL version, kernel, distro, hostname,
.I .wslconfig
contents, and
.BR "df -h /" .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show diagnose help.
.SH PACKAGES
.B wslmole packages
[\fIaction\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
Package manager wrapper for APT and Snap. The action is given positionally and
defaults to
.BR audit
.RB ( check
is an alias for
.BR audit ).
JSON output is available for
.BR audit .
.SS Actions
.TP
.B audit
List upgradable APT packages and available snap refreshes (default).
.TP
.B update
Run
.B "apt-get update && apt-get upgrade -y"
(root, with confirmation) and
.BR "snap refresh" .
.TP
.B autoremove
Preview, then run
.B "apt-get autoremove -y"
(root, with confirmation).
.TP
.B clean
Show the APT cache size, run
.B "apt-get clean"
and
.B autoclean
(root, with confirmation), and report disabled snap revisions.
.TP
.B list
Count installed dpkg selections and list snaps.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show packages help.
.SH WSL
.B wslmole wsl
[\fIaction\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
WSL-specific tools. The
.B entire command
requires a WSL environment; outside WSL it prints "Not running in WSL" and
exits non-zero. The action defaults to
.BR info .
JSON output is available for
.BR info .
.SS Actions
.TP
.B info
WSL version, kernel, distro, hostname, user, shell, the Windows
.IR .wslconfig ,
and
.I /etc/wsl.conf
(default).
.TP
.BR memory " (alias: " mem )
Allocated, used, and available memory, the
.I .wslconfig
.B memory=
limit, and swap status.
.TP
.BR compact " (alias: " compact-guide )
Step-by-step guide to compacting the WSL2
.I ext4.vhdx
virtual disk.
.TP
.B interop
WSLInterop binfmt_misc status, Windows PATH entries, the
.I /etc/wsl.conf
.B [interop]
section, and checks for cmd.exe, powershell.exe, explorer.exe, and code.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show wsl help.
.SH SCAN
.B wslmole scan
.PP
Quick system health scan. Computes a health score (0\-100) and grade
(Excellent >= 90, Good >= 70, Fair >= 50, otherwise Poor), estimates cleanable
space, and prints recommendations. This is also the default behavior when
.B wslmole
is run with no command, and via the global
.BR \-q / \-\-quick
flag. JSON output is supported. The only accepted option is
.BR \-h / \-\-help ;
any other option is an error.
.SH PLAN
.B wslmole plan
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
Show a risk-labeled action plan from lightweight checks without changing the
system (read-only). Risk levels are
.BR low ", " medium ", and " review .
JSON output is supported.
.SS Options
.TP
.BI \-\-risk " RISK"
Show only items with the given risk:
.BR low ", " medium ", or " review .
.TP
.B \-\-auto
Show only low-risk automatic actions.
.TP
.BI \-\-category " CATEGORY"
Show only one category, for example
.BR logs ", " tmp ", " snap ", " apt ", " disk ", " packages ", " services ", " wslconfig ", or " dev .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show plan help.
.SH FIX
.B wslmole fix
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
Preview and apply low-risk automatic cleanup actions from the action plan.
Only items flagged as automatic (categories
.BR apt ", " logs ", and " tmp )
are applied; other categories are skipped with a notice. Runs in dry-run mode
by default, so you must pass
.B \-\-yes
or answer the confirmation prompt to apply. In JSON mode the plan is printed
and nothing is applied.
.SS Options
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show the plan without applying actions (sets
.BR DRY_RUN=true ).
.TP
.BI \-\-only " LIST"
Apply only these automatic categories, comma-separated (for example
.BR logs,tmp ).
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Apply low-risk actions without prompting (sets
.B FORCE=true
and
.BR DRY_RUN=false ).
Unlike
.B clean
and
.BR dev ,
.B fix
parses this flag itself.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show fix help.
.SH UPDATE
.B wslmole update
[\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
Check for and install updates from the Git repository. Requires a Git checkout.
Honors
.BR DRY_RUN .
A periodic background update check also runs at startup (every
.BR WSLMOLE_UPDATE_INTERVAL
seconds, default 24h), suppressed in JSON and non-interactive sessions. JSON
output is supported for check results.
.SS Options
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-check
Check for updates without installing.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show update help.
.SH HELP
.B wslmole help
[\fIcommand\fR]
.PP
With no argument, print the full usage screen. With a command argument
.RB ( clean ", " disk ", " dev ", " diagnose ", " packages ", " wsl ", " scan ", " plan ", " fix ", or " update ),
print that command's help. The global
.BR \-h / \-\-help
flag also prints the usage screen.
.SH CONFIGURATION
On startup
.B wslmole
loads
.IR ~/.config/wslmole/config ,
a strict
.B KEY=VALUE
file (blank lines and
.B #
comments are skipped). Malformed lines, unknown keys, and values containing
.BR $ ", " ; ", " ` ", or " |
are rejected with a warning on standard error. The recognized keys are:
.TP
.B DRY_RUN
.BR true | false
(default
.BR true ).
When true, deletions are only previewed.
.TP
.B FORCE
.BR true | false
(default
.BR false ).
When true, confirmation prompts are auto-approved.
.TP
.B VERBOSE
.BR true | false
(default
.BR false ).
When true, enables session logging to the log file.
.TP
.B WSLMOLE_LOG_LEVEL
.BR DEBUG | INFO | WARN | ERROR
(default
.BR INFO ).
Gates which log messages are written.
.TP
.B WSLMOLE_UPDATE_INTERVAL
Integer seconds (default
.BR 86400 ,
24h). Controls the periodic background update-check frequency.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set, disables colored output.
.TP
.B WSLMOLE_NO_COLOR
If set to
.BR 1 ,
disables colored output.
.SH JSON OUTPUT
When
.B \-\-format json
is used, JSON is written to the caller's original standard output while human
text is redirected to standard error, so only machine-readable JSON reaches
stdout. The periodic update check and the interactive menu are suppressed in
JSON or non-interactive sessions.
.SH SAFETY
Deletions are guarded by a set of protected paths that are never removed,
including
.IR / ", " /bin ", " /boot ", " /dev ", " /etc ", " /home ", " /lib ", " /mnt ", " /opt ", " /proc ", " /root ", " /run ", " /sbin ", " /sys ", " /usr ", and " /var ,
and protected prefixes
.RI ( /bin ", " /sbin ", " /boot ", " /dev ", " /etc ", " /lib ", " /lib64 ", " /proc ", " /sys ", " /usr ", " /run )
whose contents may never be deleted. Relative paths, paths containing
.B ..
components, and the root
.B /
are refused. APT operations and journal vacuuming require root and are skipped
with a warning otherwise.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/wslmole/config
Optional configuration file (see
.BR CONFIGURATION ).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/wslmole/wslmole.log
Session log file, written when verbose logging is enabled.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/wslmole
Symlink to the entry script, created by
.BR install.sh .
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/wslmole.1
This man page.
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/bash-completion/completions/wslmole
.TQ
.I /usr/local/share/zsh/site-functions/_wslmole
Bash and zsh completion scripts (installed to the per-user XDG data directory
when the system locations are not writable).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run a quick health scan (default):
.B wslmole
.TP
Launch the interactive menu:
.B wslmole \-i
.TP
Run the quick scan by command:
.B wslmole scan
.TP
Review the action plan:
.B wslmole plan
.TP
Review only automatic plan items:
.B wslmole plan \-\-auto
.TP
Emit the action plan as JSON:
.B wslmole \-\-format json plan
.TP
Preview low-risk automatic cleanup:
.B wslmole fix \-\-dry\-run
.TP
Apply only log and temp cleanup:
.B wslmole \-\-yes fix \-\-only logs,tmp
.TP
Preview all default cleanup categories:
.B wslmole clean \-\-dry\-run
.TP
Clean APT and log files only (preview):
.B wslmole clean \-c apt,logs
.TP
Actually clean APT and logs:
.B wslmole \-\-yes clean apt logs
.TP
Find the 20 largest files in the home directory:
.B wslmole disk ~ \-m files \-n 20
.TP
Preview cleanup of developer artifacts older than 30 days:
.B wslmole dev ~/projects \-\-older\-than 30
.TP
Check for an update without installing:
.B wslmole update \-\-check
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error or blocked operation.
.TP
.B 2
Resource not found.
.TP
.B 3
Permission denied.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/mrelph/WSLMole/issues
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wsl.exe (1),
.BR apt-get (8),
.BR snap (8),
.BR journalctl (1)
